----

This module is all about learning how to use different kinds of fabrication technologies for prototyping in all its forms, and then over a series of week long design tasks, we have to put the theory we learn into practice. We work with both traditional forms of fabrication (e.g. laser cutters, 3D printers, welding etc) but also with new and emerging forms of fabrication where we explore the potential of growing materials, manufacturing biomaterials and incorporating living organisms into our prototyping. 

What follows are a series of entries, summarising the different design tasks, the design & thought process we went through, what we’ve learnt in each task and where it could go in the future. 

I hope you enjoy reading about them, all the files you’d need and recipes to make the materials are available for each challenge so that you can follow along or improve on the designs as you explore.  

Enjoy 😃
--

## Creating a gelatine-based inflatable as an alternative to single-use inflated packaging

The first challenge was to work with 2D fabrication techniques, in this case, Laser cutting, and biomaterial fabrication to create a functional item. Over a week my classmate Jorge de La Mora and I decided to explore the possibility of using a gelatine biopolymer sheet to create an inflatable product.  

### Why?

We were both interested in the future of transportation and in this case, we were both interested in exploring how deliveries will change as the use of drones to deliver goods is going to increase in the coming years. However, we were struck by how just much single-use inflatable plastic packaging is used to ship goods around the world right now, and the unnecessary waste that this produces would only increase if nothing changes. 

To explore this idea further, we decided to explore the possibility of making biobased inflatable packaging protection that could be dissolved in water and safely discarded without any harmful effects, which could be used as a potential readily available alternative to packaging for precious goods. 

### What?

After some initial exploration and ideation, we came up with the idea of a sheet with multiple air pockets that could be sealed once inflated. This sheet could then be wrapped around whichever item you were trying to protect during transport. 

For the material, we landed on a gelatine-based biopolymer sheet that could be made using 3 simple ingredients.

Our prototype is a sample of this design, containing 3 air pockets evenly spaced apart, which allows the packaging sheet to fold around whatever object is placed inside once inflated. 

### How?

When we decided that we were going to attempt this, one of the first things we needed to test was whether or not we’d be able to seal the pockets we were going to fill with air. after some initial tests with the tip of a soldering iron on a few scrap pieces of gelatine-based material we borrowed from another classmate, we realised that sealing it was going to work, but only at a much lower temperature. The melting point of Gelatine is about 35 degrees Celsius, and anything hotter than that will cut right through it. 

We realised that to ensure a tight seal in the material, we’d have to heat it to just below its melting point, enough that it became viscous enough to blend into a solid piece of material but without becoming completely liquid once again. 

The optimum temperature we discovered for this is about **30 degrees Celsius.**

**The Recipe:** 

To make the material, use the recipe below: 

Water: 240 ml
Glycerine: 48 g
Gelatine: 48 g

This is the base recipe, (for larger batches like in our case, double each ingredient amount, and keep going till you get the amount you need) In our case, we needed 4 batches so:

*Water: 960 ml
Glycerine: 192 g
Gelatine: 192 g*

Next, we had to cast the material into a mould to give us a large rectangular sheet. This we achieved with a large acrylic sheet to which we added a wooden lip on each side to give us a cavity to pour the gelatine mixture into without it spilling. 

You will need some kind of acrylic, silicone or glass to build this mould, using wood as a base will cause the gelatine to stick and not come out. 

**Important Learning!: Let the gelatine mixture cool just a little in the pot before pouring it in, otherwise, it will cause the acrylic to warp and you’ll have gelatine pouring all over the floor — *as we unfortunately discovered.***  

Once successfully removed, the sheet of gelatine was allowed to dry to make sure that would have enough strength to withstand being inflated while still maintaining the elasticity we needed. 

**Laser cutting**

As the sheet dried, we designed some templates for the air pockets in Fusion 360, saved them as .DWG files (which you can find at the bottom of this page)  and laser cut them out of baking paper(if you don’t have a laser cutter you can also use scissors, it will also work just fine). 

It’s important to use something like baking paper, we learned from an instructable article that the grease properties of baking paper (when placed in between two sheets of the same material) will stop two sheets of material from sticking to each other when heat is applied across the material.  

We used this exact process to make sure our gelatine sheet didn’t just congeal once more into one big solid sheet. 

**Putting it all together**

When the gelatine sheet was fully dry, we cut our sheet down to size, placed our templates onto one half of the sheet, folded the other half back over, making sure to leave a little exposed area as an inlet for the air, and placed our material in the heat press available in the FabLab. 

*If you can’t access a heat press, a hair dryer will work just as well, start on a medium heat setting and apply heat evenly over the surface of the material. make sure to place the material on another sheet of baking paper that covers both the top and bottom of the material. This makes sure it doesn’t melt and stick to whatever surface you are working on.* 

Once that was finished and fully cooled, we could begin inflating each pocket and testing out our newly made packaging material.  

After the first few tests we discovered a few leaks in the material where we hadn’t sealed it properly. to melt these back down we used the edge of a hot pan, this works wonders for applying directional heat and can be done very easily and quickly. 

After that, we tested again and success! 

Each of the pockets was able to inflate without bursting. 

**Key Learning: We discovered that it’s easier to seal off the air entryway completely, with a few strips of gelatine, creating a completely sealed environment. Then inflate each pocket by inserting a needle connected to a small length of tubing into the air pocket and inflating it. This creates a much smaller hole for the air to escape out of and can be sealed up quickly without losing any of the air inside the pocket.** 

Once each pocket is successfully inflated, (you can either use a small pump like we did, or blow down the tube, both ways will work just as well as each other) you can wrap it around whatever object you’d like that fits and know that it will be decently protected in case it’s dropped during transit. 

### How we felt:

At first we weren’t all that confident that we’d get the gelatine material to inflate at all as we hadn’t managed to achieve a uniform consistency, with some parts of the sheet being much thicker than the other. We were worried it was going to burst when we first inflated it, but when it held we were extremely relieved and excited to keep learning and iterating with this material. 

### Key Findings:

1. This material seems like it’s a suitable alternative to single-use inflatable packaging, it’s not difficult to make and if there are problems with casting it you can always remelt it and try again. 
2. It’s actually beneficial to have a slightly higher material thickness for this use case, you will need more power to inflate it but the benefit is higher durability and air retention. 
3. It seems that the material may be porous to air over time, and if left inflated for days it will being to deflate as air leaks out through the material itself, so its important to keep that in mind.
4. Using corn starch or talcum powder gives the material a rubber like texture, we haven’t explored this much but it work to further enhance the durability of the material itself and make it even better for the packaging scenario we had imagined. 

### Into the Future:

Moving forward it would be interesting to explore further how this material could be adapted to the use case Jorge and I dreamt up, the most immediate steps would be to test the material further, exploring how well it can protect items placed inside from large drops simulating how a drone might deliver medicines to remote communities.  

*This weeks exercises have allowed me to explore an area that I hadn’t had any experience with before, both using laser cutters and making bio materials, and I’m excited to keep updating and using this knowledge as the course and my projects develop.* 

### Project Video

You can check out a video showcasing our entire process here below! 👇 If you enjoy it or have any other questions please let us know! 😃

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/z4iPZfoDtFw?si=1WGvf2kUI9H0bScc" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

### Laser cutter & 3D model file:

You can find the files for the laser cutter and the 3D model by clicking the button below, the 3D model is all parametric so you should be able to change it to fit your needs! 👇

[Take me to the fabrication files!](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1OUpeHhaR7vIsqFo_2l2Ze99QtsDSC7oc?usp=sharing){ .md-button .md-button--primary }

### Resources:

[Saskia Helinska @ Fabricademy](https://class.textile-academy.org/2022/saskia-helinska/finalproject.html)

[Airtight Self-Sealing Inflatable](https://www.instructables.com/Airtight-Self-Sealing-Inflatable/)

[MOT – making the invisible visible](http://class.textile-academy.org/2019/Montserrat/week11.html)

[Homemade Bioplastic : gelatin](https://www.youtube.com/shorts/Lzp4nMNNmuM)